Forecasting Transaction Fees Earned Per Transaction: Bitcoin


This is a repository with all the information for Matthew Bennett's and mine projection of the future of Bitcoin Transaction Fees in the near future.

Attached are copies of our raw data, models, and our final paper. Enjoy!

If you are interested, below is an excert from our paper which describes the methodology we used to create our forecast, makingit easy to replicate our work.

Methodology:
	Our method used to best forecast the transaction fees about a month in the future was by calculating a time series decomposition model and excluding a seasonal factor, as there was no seasonal factor to be observed in the transaction fees. This model worked spectacularly in getting a rather smoothed overall trend in the data and really shone well when looking at the most recent observations (about a year and a half back, after the huge spike in the price of bitcoin in late 2017). We used a time series approach because we found that transaction fee amounts were impacted very little by outside forces; so much that any model chosen in relation to any factor of bitcoin was completely worthless. The center moving average (CMA) allowed us to calculate the center moving average trend (CMAT), which then gave us a cyclical factor (CF) as a ratio of the two, per three day period. This CF was then forecasted out by itself by using an exponential smoothing model using the data of the CF from the past 2 months, to give a somewhat predictable CF outside of the sample data. After using Excel’s solver to minimize the RMSE of the new, exponentially smoothed CF in relation to the CF itself, we had a very nice, smooth forecast that could give an adaptive prediction a month into the future. This isn’t something a typical time series decomposition (TSD) model can do, as TSDs cannot estimate a CF outside of the sample. This exponentially smoothed CF made our prediction slightly less accurate in the sample, but gave us a much better CF outside of the sample, especially when compared to just selecting a CF value and using it for all out-of-sample predictions like a typical TSD model. Because the forecast itself is comprised of the exponentially smoothed CF multiplied by the CMAT, which is a function of the CMA, the CMA is the only portion of the forecast that needed to be estimated into the future. In order to be as realistic as possible, we chose to take the average CMA for the last year, to help reduce the impact of a few slightly larger spikes in the data. The result gave a slightly decreasing CMA over time. This made our forecast have a heavier weight on the exponentially smoothed CF, due to the smaller amount of variation seen in the CMA. The last piece of our forecast is a form of an event study completed on the CMAT, where the effect of  “Veriblock” on the transaction quantity was factored for by including an “if-statement” in Excel to adjust the CMAT during the length of time that Veriblock ran its course, which ended up being a one month window from late March to late April. By subtracting about 10% from the CMAT during this time window, the exponentially smoothed CF was able to quickly adjust and recover from the effects of the Veriblock impact. 
